AYUSHMAN BHARAT PRADHAN MANTRIJAN AROGYA YOJANA (AB PM-JAY)
Grievance Redressal Guidelines
December 2021

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMGrievance Redressal Guidelines
AYUSHMAN BHARAT PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AROGYA
YOJANA (AB PM-JAY)
December 2021

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMCONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................... 4
1.
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................ 5
2.
OBJECTIVES OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM .............................. 5
3.
GRIEVANCE TYPES AND WHO CAN FILE GRIEVANCES ................................. 5
4.
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL STRUCTURE AND AUTHORITIES .......................... 6
4.1 DISTRICT GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL COMMITTEE ....................................... 6
4.2 STATE GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL COMMITTEE ............................................. 8

4.3 STATE APPELLATE AUTHORITY ........................................................................ 94.4 NATIONAL GRIEVANCE REDERSSAL COMMITTEE .................................. 10
4.5 GREVANCE OFFICER …………………………………………...………………11
5.
MEETING SCHEDULE OF COMMITTEES ............................................................ 12
6.
LODGING AND REGISTRATION OF GRIEVANCES .......................................... 13
7.
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISMS ........................................................... 14
7.1 PROCESS FOR REDRESSAL DIRECTLY BY DGNO/SGNO........................... 14
7.2 PROCESS OF REDRESSAL THROUGH THE RELEVANT GRIEVANCE

COMMITTEE ............................................................................................................ 158.
COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL
COMMITTEES.............................................................................................................. 16
9.
MODE OF COMMUNICATION ................................................................................. 16
10. AUTO-ESCALATION OF GRIEVANCES ................................................................ 17
11. REPORTING ................................................................................................................. 17

12. MONITORING .............................................................................................................. 17ANNEXURE 1 ........................................................................................................................ 19
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MATRIX .............................................................................. 19
ANNEXURE 1 ........................................................................................................................ 27
DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................................... 27

ANNEXURE 2 ........................................................................................................................ 29ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .............................................................................. 29

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMExecutive Summary
The National Health Authority has developed the Central Grievance Redressal Management
System (CGRMS) to register, monitor and dispose of grievances under AB PM-JAY
transparently and effectively. Grievance Redressal under AB PM-JAY has a multi-tier system
at District, State, and National Level. District Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC) is the
nodal authority at the district level, State Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC), State
Appellate Authority (SAA) at the state level and National Grievance Redressal Committee at
National level for redressal of the grievances. State Appellate Authority (SAA) shall be the final

appellate authority for handling and resolution of all grievances received either directly orescalated through the SGRC. Monthly meeting  of respective committees at District and State
level shall take place to ensure timely redressal of grievances. At each level, there is a dedicated
nodal officer viz. District Grievance Nodal Officer (DGNO), State Grievance Nodal Officer
(SGNO) and National Grievance Nodal Officer (NGNO).
To support this structure, an IT-enabled and web-based grievance redressal system has been
developed which enables a person to register a grievance and the nodal officer to view the
details of registered grievances on the portal- https://grievance.pmjay.gov.in or

https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in .The nodal officers are responsible to resolve grievances as per the defined turn-around time.
Complainants can track the status of their grievance using the Unique Grievance Number which
is generated at the time of registration. The status update will be intimated to the complainant
through automated e-mail system and SMS notification. For efficient and timely redressal of
the grievances, automated intimation is also enabled for the nodal officers through e-mail &
SMS. The cases which are unresolved by the concerned nodal officer are automatically
escalated to the higher authority. If any party is not satisfied with the decision of the concerned

nodal officer or committee, the case is escalated directly to the next higher-level committee forfurther actions.
This document describes the structure of the various committees, modes of grievance
registration, mechanism of grievance redressal and reporting system. Additionally, the
document also provides a matrix explaining types of grievances, escalation levels, and TAT
(Turn Around Time) to ensure effective resolution of the grievances.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM1. INTRODUCTION
Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana is a flagship program of the
Government which provides a cover up to Rs.5 lakh per family per year for secondary and
tertiary care hospitalization to over 10.74 crore entitled beneficiary families listed in SECC
2011 data set. The benefits are available free of cost at an empaneled public or private
hospital in cashless and paperless manner, portable across India.
National Health Agency (NHA) is the Nodal Agency mandated to implement AB PM-JAY
across India and address the disputes and grievances of the beneficiaries, healthcare
providers and other stakeholders in a transparent and time bound manner.

NHA has established an effective multi-tiered redressal mechanism via Central GrievanceRedressal Management System (CGRMS) and Grievance Redressal Guidelines, and it is
the sole authority for any subsequent amendments to Guidelines.
2. OBJECTIVES OF THE GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM
To ensure that grievances of all stakeholders are redressed within the time frame mentioned
in the Grievance Guidelines up to the satisfaction of the aggrieved party based on the
principles of natural justice while ensuring that cashless access to timely and quality care
to remains uncompromised
3. GRIEVANCE TYPES AND WHO CAN FILE GRIEVANCES

3.1 Grievances can be filed by any stakeholder, for this purpose, a stakeholder includes:a. AB PM-JAY Beneficiary
b. Healthcare Provider
c. Insurer or its employees
d. Implementation Support Agency (ISA) or its employees
e. State Health Agency (SHA) or its employees or nominated functionaries for
implementation of the Scheme; and
f. Any other person

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM3.2 Any person who may have observations, comments or feedback on any aspect of the
Scheme, may also file a complaint along with specific details. Vague comments/feedback
which are not actionable shall not be entertained/accepted
3.3 Illustrative and indicative list of grievances is given in the Grievance Redressal Matrix
(refer to Annexure 1 in this document)
4. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL STRUCTURE AND AUTHORITIES
AB PM-JAY has a multi-tier grievance redressal structure to ensure timely redressal of
grievances. This section of the guidelines lays down these structures, their constitution,
and functions.
4.1 District Grievance Redressal Committee

A District Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC) should be constituted by theSHA in each district
4.1.1 Constitution of the DGRC:
a. Head of the District or District Magistrate or District Collector or Deputy
Commissioner shall be the Chairperson of the DGRC
b. Chief Executive Officer or District Development Officer  or ADC/ADM
(Development) in-charge of Zilla Panchayat
c. The Chief Medical Officer of the district shall be the Convener
d. District Coordinator of the Insurer (in case of insurance mode)
e. District Grievance Nodal Officer (DGNO)
f. Other experts for specific cases as determined by the Chairperson or the
Convenor on behalf of the Chairperson
4.1.2 Functions of the DGRC:

The DGRC shall perform all functions related to handling and resolution ofgrievances
within their respective districts. In general, day to day redressal of complaints should
be done by DGNO. He need not wait for meeting of the DGRC to take place to initiate
an enquiry or action, as expected in the case. He should however keep his authorities

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMinformed about the inquiry. Regular operational issues should be handled by him so
that beneficiaries/hospitals/stakeholders do not face any inconvenience or problem.
About serious complaints which warrant action against a person/institution, he
should submit report including his observations to CMO and DGRC for
decision/action.
The specific functions of DGRC will include:
a. Track and redress all grievances referred to it, following the principles of
natural justice
b. Call for additional information as and when required either directly from an
aggrieved party or from the concerned agencies / individuals
c. Conduct grievance redressal proceedings as required

d. If required, call for hearings and representations from the parties concernedwhile determining the merits and demerits of a case
e. Adjudicate and issue final orders on grievances
f. In case of grievances that need urgent redressal, develop internal mechanisms
for redressing the grievances within the shortest possible time, which could
include, but not be limited to, convening special meetings of the DGRC
g. Review grievance records
h. Monitor the grievance database to ensure that all grievances are resolved within 30
days or earlier stated as per the provisions of these guidelines or any amendments
to the CGRMS Guidelines issued by the NHA and / or the SHA

i. DGRC shall be competent to seek report or assistance of any authority in the districtto take suitable action as deemed appropriate
j. Issue directions/take action like recommending de-empanelment of the hospitals,
recommending suspension of license of a doctor/paramedic, etc. Principles of
natural justice should be followed while taking such actions
k. In case the DGRC can’t meet in foreseeable future, the Chairman or an officer
authorized by him in this regard may take any of the above actions. However,
such actions should be placed in front of the Committee during the next meeting
for ratification
l. Ensure compliance to the Grievance Redressal Guideline of AB PM-JAY

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM4.2 State Grievance Redressal Committee
The State Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) should be constituted by the SHA at
each state
4.2.1 Constitution of the SGRC:
a. CEO of SHA / State Nodal Agency (SNA) shall be the Chairperson of the
SGRC
b. The State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO) of the SHA shall be the Convenor of
SGRC
c. Representatives of the Departments of Rural Development, Women & Child
Development, Labor, Tribal Welfare
d. Director Health Services
e. Medical Superintendent of the leading state level government hospital or the
Dean of the leading medical college in the State
f. Representative of Insurance Company (Applicable only where scheme is in

Insurance or Mixed Mode)g. Other experts for specific cases as determined by the Chairperson or the Convenor
on behalf of the Chairperson
4.2.2 Functions of the SGRC:
The SGRC shall perform all functions related to handling and resolution of all
grievances received either directly or escalated through the DGRC. When beneficiary
is the one of the parties the decision of the SGRC shall be final. The specific functions
shall include:
a. Act as an Appellate Authority for appealing against the orders of the DGRC
b. Track and redress all grievances referred to it, following the principles of
natural justice
c. Call for additional information as required either directly from an aggrieved

party or from the concerned agencies / individualsd. Conduct grievance redressal proceedings as required
e. Nominate District Grievance Nodal Officer (DGNO) at each District
f. Oversee grievance redressal functions of the DGRC including but not limited to
monitoring the turnaround time for grievance redressal
g. Perform all tasks necessary to decide on all such appeals within 30 days of

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMreceiving such appeal
h. Adjudicate and issue final orders on grievances
i. Ensure compliance to the Grievance Redressal Guideline of AB PM-JAY
4.2.3 For any appeal escalated to the SGRC, the SGRC, at its sole discretion may assign
the task of investigation of the grievance to the independent agency or any official.
4.2.4 Complaints/grievances/appeals received against the orders of State Empanelment
Committee as regards empanelment/de-empanelment shall be referred to State
Appellate Authority for further action and disposal. These types of appeals/
representations/etc. should be filed directly to State Appellate Authority.

4.2.5 Complaints/grievances received against any of the officials of the SHA or State/UTGovernment shall be referred to the State Appellate Authority.
4.3 State Appellate Authority
Principal Secretary (Health) shall function as the State Appellate Authority (SAA) of the
respective state.
4.3.1 Functions of SAA
The SAA shall perform all functions related to handling and resolution of all
grievances received or escalated through the SGRC. The specific functions shall
include:
a) Act as an Appellate Authority for appeal against the orders of the SGRC
b) Redressal of all grievances referred to it, following the principles of natural justice

c) Call for additional information as required either directly from an aggrieved party orfrom the concerned agencies / individuals
d) Oversee grievance redressal functions of the SGRC including but not limited to
monitoring the turnaround time for grievance redressal
e) Perform all tasks necessary to decide on all appeals received within 30 days
f) Adjudicate and issue final orders on grievances
g) For any appeal escalated to the SAA, the SAA may at its sole discretion assign the
task of investigation of the grievance to the independent agency or any official if need
be
h) The decision of SAA shall be final and binding wherein SHA and Insurance
Company/ISA/TPA are the aggrieved parties

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM4.4 National Grievance Redressal Committee
The National Grievance Redressal Committee (NGRC) shall be formed by the Chief
Executive Officer, National Health Authority at the national level.
4.4.1. Constitution of the NGRC:
a.
The constitution of the NGRC shall be determined by the NHA in accordance with the
Guidelines from time to time.
b. Members for NGRC:
i.
Deputy CEO of National Health Authority (NHA) – Chairperson
ii.
Head Beneficiary Engagement Division (NHA) – Convenor
iii.
Representative of Finance Division (NHA)
iv.
Representative of IRDAI/ Member of General Insurance Corporation
v.
Other experts for specific cases as determined by the Chairperson or the

Convenor on behalf of the Chairperson4.4.3 Functions of the NGRC:
The NGRC shall act as the apex Authority and shall
a. Review state-wise performance of the Grievance Redressal. Review may include but
not be limited to analysis of monthly reports from the SHA and field visits for
monitoring, evaluation and make suggestions for improvement in the system
b. Provide need-based mentoring and capacity building support to the SGRCs
c. Issue specific recommendations to the states/SHAs for corrective actions and process
improvement based on state-wise review of grievance redressal data
d. Issue amendments to the national grievance redressal guidelines as and when
required

e. NGRC shall ensure adequate and effective settlement of disputes only betweenInsurance Company / ISA / TPA and SHA, with respect to any deviation from ‘Terms
& Conditions’ of the contract and NHA guidelines between the two parties or any act
of omission or commission with respect to the contractual provision
Grievances wherein EHCP or beneficiary are the one of the parties shall not be entertained by
NGRC and decision of SAA shall be final and binding.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMThe meetings of the NGRC shall be convened as per the cases received by it for consideration or
as per the convenience of the Chairman, NGRC.
For any appeal escalated to the NHA, the NHA may at its sole discretion assign the task of
investigation of the grievance to the independent agency or relevant official if need be.
4.5 Grievance Officer
4.5.1 District Grievance Nodal Officer (DGNO)
DGNO is a person who is nominated by SGRC to resolve the grievances at district level
under PM-JAY. The roles and responsibilities of DGNO are as listed below:
a. Addressing grievances of stakeholders directly or through DGRC within the timeframe
defined

b. Ratifying the actions taken against the grievances by placing in the DGRC from timeto time
c. Enter the particulars of the grievance on the CGRMS portal received directly,
telephonically, through letter, email or social media and updating the status in CGRMS
d. Initiating enquiries wherever felt necessary with the approval of District Medical
Officer/District Health Officer/Civil Surgeon or any other officer nominated
e. Referring grievances to convener of DGRC
f. Forwarding grievances to concerned DGNO/SGNO in case the grievance doesn’t fall
under his/her jurisdiction
g. Submitting reports and records
4.5.2 State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO)

SGNO is a person who is nominated by SHA to address the grievances at state levelunder PM-JAY. The roles and responsibilities of the SGNO are as listed below:
a. Addressing grievances of stakeholders directly or through SGRC within the
timeframe defined
b. Giving priority to the grievances that are emergent nature
c. Ratifying the actions taken against the grievances by placing them in the SGRC
from time to time
d. Forwarding the grievances which are received at state level to concerned DGNO for

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMfurther actions
e. Referring grievances to convener of SGRC
f. Forwarding grievances to concerned SGNO in case the grievance doesn’t fall under
his/her jurisdiction
g. Monitoring of the grievances and ensuring grievances are resolved within the time
frame at State & District Level
h. Submitting reports and records
4.5.3 National Grievance Nodal Officer (NGNO)
NGNO is a person who is nominated by NHA to address the grievances at National
level under PM-JAY The roles and responsibilities of the NGNO are as listed below
a. Forwarding the grievances received at national level to concerned SGNO
for the action
b. Referring grievances to convener of NGRC

c. Monitoring of the grievances and ensuring grievances are resolved as per the timeframe,
d. Submitting reports and records
5. Meeting Schedule of Committees
The DGRC & SGRC meeting should be conducted every month on a specific day on regular
basis.  State can decide a particular date/day based on the convenience and availability of the
members of the committee.
SAA meetings shall be convened within one week of receiving the grievances before SAA.
5.1 For inter-state / Union Territory (Portability) cases:
a. All grievances of beneficiaries against the hospital shall be referred to the DGNO of
the State/UT where beneficiary is availing benefits of PM-JAY

b. Inter-state beneficiary cases should be solved jointly by the concerned DGRC and SGRCof two respective states/ UTs. They shall coordinate amongst themselves, if required,
to redress the grievance
c. All Empaneled Health Care Provider grievances against the Insurer / SHA shall be
referred to the SGRC of both parent State/UT and State/UT where the claim is raised
by State/UT. The SGRCs of both the states shall coordinate amongst them, if required,
to redress the grievance

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM6. LODGING AND REGISTRATION OF GRIEVANCES
6.1 Any grievance under AB PM-JAY can be raised through following means:
Online Mode
Through online
grievance redressal portal
– CGRMS
of AB PM-JAY
(https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in)
Offline Mode
• AB PM-JAY Call Centre helpline no. 14555
• Through letter, telephone, e-mail, and fax to the official addresses of the SHA
or the NHA
• Directly with the DGNO of the district where such stakeholder is located or
where such grievance has arisen
6.2 Details of all complaints shall be entered in CGRMS portal by the concerned officer.
a. For all grievances received by the call center, call center executives shall register the

details of the grievance in the CGRMS portal as per defined format. The grievancewill appear in the login of concerned Grievance Nodal Officer.
b. The DGNO shall enter the particulars of the grievances which are received in the form
of letter, telephonic, fax or direct walk-in cases on the CGRMS portal established by
the NHA.
c. The CGRMS will automatically generate a Unique Grievance Number (UGN),
categorize the nature of the grievance and an auto SMS sent to the stakeholder as per
the Grievance Redressal Matrix (Annexure 1)
6.3 Special powers of the authorities: The SHA, SGRC and/ or the SAA shall have the

authority to initiate Suo moto proceedings and file a grievance on behalf of itself and / orPM-JAY Beneficiaries under the Scheme. They can also take cognizance of reports in
social media and other public forums for further investigation and redressal.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM7 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISMS
Upon receipt of a grievance, the DGNO/SGNO shall try to resolve the same directly
through his/her own efforts and coordination with concerned parties. However, if he/she
is unable to resolve the grievance at his/her level, the same may be put up before the
concerned Grievance redressal committee.
Each grievance irrespective of the mode of receipt shall be first registered on the CGRMS
portal with a unique grievance number for tracking till closure.  Following process shall
be followed:
7.1    Process for Redressal directly by DGNO/SGNO
While redressing the grievances,

a. The grievance officer should analyze the case and seek explanation from thestakeholder/s against whom the grievance is being lodged by sending a show cause
notice
b. The stakeholder against whom a grievance has been lodged must send its comments/
response to the aggrieved party with copy to the DGNO/SGNO within 7 days. If the
grievance is not addressed within such 7 days period, the DGNO/SGNO shall send a
reminder for redressal within a time period specified by the DGNO/SGNO
c. The DGNO/SGNO shall try to resolve the grievance by forwarding the same to Action
Taking Authority (ATA). If the grievance is not resolved or comments are not received

within 15 days of the grievance, then the matter may be referred to relevant GrievanceRedressal Committee
d. If the DGNO/SGNO is satisfied that the comments/ response received from the
stakeholder satisfactorily addresses the grievance(s), then the DGNO/SGNO shall
communicate this to the aggrieved party by Letter/e-mail/SMS/telephone and update
on the CGRMS portal.
e. If the DGNO/SGNO is not satisfied with the comments/ response received or
if no comment/ response is received from the stakeholder despite a reminder,
then the DGNO/SGNO shall refer such grievance to the Convener of the
relevant Grievance Redressal Committee

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM7.2 Process of Redressal through the Relevant Grievance Committee
All the cases which are appealed against the orders of grievance officer must be
placed before   the concerned grievance redressal committee.
a. The Convener of the relevant Grievance Redressal Committee shall place the
grievance before the Grievance Redressal Committee for its decision at its next
meeting
b. Each grievance shall be addressed by the relevant Grievance Redressal
Committee within a period of 30 days of the receipt of the grievance.
Depending on the urgency of the case, the Grievance Redressal Committee
may decide to meet earlier for a speedier resolution of the grievance

c. The relevant Grievance Redressal Committee shall arrive at a logical decisionwithin 30 days of receipt of the grievance. All such decisions shall be based on
the principles of natural justice (including giving the parties a reasonable
opportunity to be heard) and be taken by majority vote of its members present
d. If any party to a grievance is not satisfied with the decision of the relevant
Grievance Redressal Committee, it may appeal against the decision within 30
days to the higher Grievance Redressal Committee or other authority having
powers of appeal
e. If an appeal is not filed within 30-day period, the aggrieved party shall lose its

right to appeal, and the decision of the original Grievance Redressal Committeeshall be final and binding
f. A Grievance Redressal Committee or any other authority having powers of
appeal shall dispose of an appeal within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. Such
decision shall be given after following the principles of natural justice,
including giving the parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The decision
of the Grievance Redressal Committee or other authority having powers of
appeal shall be final and binding

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM8  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL COMMITTEES
8.1 Parties against whom an order has been issued by any Grievance Redressal Committee,
shall ensure that all orders are fully complied with and executed within not more than 30
calendar days of the issuance of the order unless such order has been stayed on appeal
8.2 If the party against whom such orders have been issued, fails to comply with the order
within 30-day period or a time period set forth in the Grievance Redressal Committee
Order, the defaulting party shall    be liable to pay penalty as described under the contract
between the parties

8.3 The defaulting party shall be liable to pay the levied penalty to the SHA within 15 daysof receiving a written notice from the SHA. All such payments have to be made by the
defaulting party in the manner as specified by the SHA in the notice issued
8.4 On failure to pay penalty, the defaulting party shall be liable to pay a penal interest at the
rate of one percent of the total outstanding penalty amount for every 15 days for which
such penalty amount remains unpaid
8.5 For delays in compliance to the order beyond three months of the date of its issue, the
SHA/ NHA shall have the right to seek recourse to available legal remedies all costs of
which shall be borne by the defaulting party

9 Mode of CommunicationThe decision made by the grievance officer or the grievance committee must be
communicated to all the parties as soon as possible in writing and in addition, if possible,
by e-mail. In addition, a phone call should also be made to a beneficiary informing him
about the redressal of the grievance.
*System generated SMS shall be automatically sent to aggrieved party through CGRMS
portal about the status of the grievance.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM10 AUTO-ESCALATION OF GRIEVANCES
The grievances which are not resolved within the prescribed TAT or if no action is taken
by the concerned officer then such cases will be automatically escalated to the higher
authority.
E.g., if DGNO has not taken any action within 15 days, the case will be escalated to the
SGNO.
11 REPORTING
11.1 CGRMS portal generates various reports like total grievance count, age wise
pendency, closure report, SOS Grievances
11.2 Such reports may be utilized by grievance redressal officials in planning and
decision making
12 MONITORING
12.1 The SHA shall be responsible for monitoring the functioning of the CGRMS
within the state

12.2 Some of the key indicators for tracking the efficiency of GRS system shall be:a. Resolution turn-around time ratio
Indicator
Resolution turn-around time ratio
Description
Grievances that are resolved within the prescribed time
frame
Numerator (N)
Number of grievances resolved within the prescribed time
frame
Denominator (D)
Total number of grievances registered
Calculation
(N /D) *100
Frequency of
measurement
Monthly
Acceptable Threshold
(benchmark)
98% or more
Table 1 Turn Around Ratio

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMb. Escalation ratio
Indicator
Escalation ratio
Description
Grievances that needed escalation
Numerator (N)
Number of GRC orders that were appealed against
Denominator (D)
Total number of GRC orders issued
Calculation
(N /D)*100
Frequency of
measurement
Monthly
Acceptable Threshold
(benchmark)
10 % or less
Table 2 Escalation Ratio
12.3 These indicators are illustrative and may evolve and be amended by the NHA and / or
the SHA from time to time.
12.4 The NHA shall provide overall supervision and monitoring of the implementation of
the CGRMS across all states. This may include site visits, and internal and third-party
process audits.

12.5 Monitoring of time series grievance data may also provide insights into theoverall performance of the AB PM-JAY.  Some of these indicators could be:
a. Percentage of grievances resolved through Direct Channel
b. Percentage of grievances related to out-of-pocket payments
c. Percentage of grievances related to quality of services
d. Percentage of grievances related to denial of services
e. Percentage of beneficiary grievances related to delays in receiving services
f. Percentage of grievances from empaneled providers related to delays in receiving
claims reimbursements
g. Number of grievances related to portability benefits

h. Percentage of provider grievances related to portability claims12.6 Analyses of these grievance related indicators over time and across states (may be even
across districts) is likely to provide useful insights for course corrections and
strengthening the implementation mechanisms under the AB PM-JAY.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMAnnexure 1
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MATRIX
Sl.
No
Aggrieved
party
Grievance
against
Indicative nature of grievances
Approach
authority
Turn- around
time
Grievance escalated to Committees (if
either party is not satisfied)
Beneficiary
Empaneled
Healthcare
providers
SOS (Emergency) Grievances
(Grievances Registered during the
period of hospitalization)
• Denied treatment under PM-JAY     by
empaneled healthcare provider at the
time of admission
• Demanding money for the services
which are available for free in the
scheme
• Not returning PM-JAY card at the
time of discharge
• Prescribed
medicines
and
diagnostics
from
outside,
which are available for free in
the scheme

• Non-availability of Arogya Mitra• Non-Cooperation by Arogya
Mitra.
• Misconduct by Hospital Staff
SGNO
6 working hours
(if the case is  not
resolved within
TAT, CEO of
SHA
will be alerted
through system
generated Email)
• SGRC decision shall be final &
binding

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM• Charge money for printing
Ayushman card.
Beneficiary
Empaneled
Healthcare
providers
Non-SOS (Non-Emergency)
Grievances (Grievances Registered
before admission or after discharge of
the patient)
• Denied treatment under AB PM-JAY
• Money sought for treatment,
despite sum insured under AB PM-
JAY cover being available
• Demanding more than Package
Rate/ Pre-Authorized Amount
• AB PM-JAY Ayushman Card
retained by Empaneled Health Care
Provider
• Free medicines & Consultation not
provided during follow-up
• Ayushman Card not provided
despite eligibility
• Poor Quality of Treatment
• Poor facilities
DGNO
15 days
(If no response
received
by
stakeholder
within 7 days of

showcause
notice,
DGNO
should
send
reminder)
• DGRC (Within 30 days of the
DGNO decision)
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGRC decision, then they can appeal
to SGRC within 30 days
• SGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance.
• SGRC decision shall be final &
binding

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM• Non-availability of Arogya Mitra
• Non-Cooperation of Arogya
Mitra
• Misconduct by Hospital Staff
Beneficiary
Insurance
company /
TPA
• Demanding money for approval
of pre-authorization
• Misconduct by IC/ISA/TPA
representative
DGNO /
SGNO
15 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGNO/SGNO
30 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGRC
• If grievance is not resolved by
DGNO/SGNO within 15 days, case
shall be referred to DGRC/SGRC.
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGNO’s/SGNO’s decision, then they
can appeal to DGRC/SGRC within 30
days of the DGNO/SGNO order
• DGRC/SGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance.
• If either party is not satisfied with

DGRC decision, then they can appealto SGRC within 30 days
• SGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance.
• SGRC decision shall be final and
binding
Beneficiary
Common
Service
Centre (CSC)
• Demanding extra money (above the
approved cost of Rs. 30) for issuing
Ayushman card
• Card issued to another family
• Card not provided to beneficiary
• Poor Quality of Service
DGNO
15 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGNO
30 days of
receipt of
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGNO’s decision, then they can
appeal to DGRC within 30 days of the
DGNO
• DGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMgrievance for
DGRC
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGRC decision, then they can appeal
to SGRC within 30 days
• SGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance.
• SGRC decision shall be final and
binding
Beneficiary
District
authorities
• Grievance not addressed by the
concerned officer
SGNO
15 days of
receipt of
grievance for
SGNO
30 days of
receipt of
grievance for
SGRC
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGRC order, they shall approach the
SGRC
• Decision of SGRC on such cases
shall be final and binding.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMHealth Care
Provider
Beneficiary
• Misconduct or harassment by the
beneficiary
• Any other
DGNO
15 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGNO
30 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGRC
• If grievance is not resolved by DGNO
within 15 days, case shall be referred
to DGRC.
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGNO’s decision, then they can
appeal to DGRC within 30 days of
the DGNO order
• DGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
the grievance.
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGRC decision, then they can appeal
to SGRC within 30 days
• SGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
• the grievance

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM• Decision of the SGRC shall be final
and binding.
Health Care
Provider
Insurance
Company /
ISA / TPA
/SHA
• Claims rejected by Insurer/SHA in
full or partial claim amount not
paid
• Demanding Money for Claim
Settlement
• Misconduct by ISA/TPA/ SHA
Representatives
• Non-cooperation by Insurer/ISA/
SHA
• Delay in claim payment
DGNO
/SGNO/
SAA
15 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGNO/SGNO
/SAA
30 days of
receipt of
grievance for
DGRC
30 days of
receipt of
grievance for
SAA
• If either party is not satisfied with
DGNO’s decision, then they can
appeal to DGRC within 30 days of
the DGNO order
• DGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
the grievance.

• If either party is not satisfied withDGRC decision, then they can appeal
to SGRC within 30 days
•  SGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
the grievance
• If either party is not satisfied with
SGRC order, they shall approach
the SAA within 30 days of the
SGRC order.
• The decision of SAA shall be final
and binding.
Health Care
Provider
Insurer/ISA/
D istrict
Empanelment
• Demanding money for
empanelment
• Not empaneled despite meeting all
the criteria
SGRC
30 days of
receipt of
grievance
• SGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
the grievance
• If either party is not satisfied with
• SGRC order, they shall approach

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMCommittee
(DEC)
• SAA within 30 days of the SGRC
order.
• The decision of SAA shall be final
and binding.
Health Care
Provider
State
Empanelment
Committee
• Empanelment/ Suspension/ De-
empanelment
SGRC
30 days of
receipt of
grievance
• SGRC shall have 30 days to
resolve the grievance
• If either party is not satisfied with
the SGRC order, they shall approach
the SAA within 30 days of the
SGRC order.
• Decision of the SAA shall be final
and binding.
Insurance
Company /
ISA / TPA
SHA
• Premium not received within time
prescribed
• Fees for Service not paid as per the
MOU
• AB PM-JAY Beneficiary
Database not updated
SGRC
30 days of
receipt of
grievance

• If either party is not satisfied withSGRC order, they shall approach the
SAA within 30 days of the SGRC
order.
• If either party is not satisfied with
SAA order, they shall approach
NGRC within 30 days of the SAA
order.
• Decision of the NGRC shall be final
and binding.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMCommon
Service
Centre-VLE
IC/ISA/SHA
• Non-Approval of Beneficiary
Registration despite all records
provided
• Not Providing Technical
Support
• Demanding Money for approval
of Ayushman card
SGNO /
SGRC
15 days of
receipt of
grievance
for SGNO
30 days of receipt
of grievance for
SGRC
• SGRC shall have 30 days to resolve
the grievance
• If either party is not satisfied with
SGRC order, they shall approach
SAA within 30 days of the SGRC
order.
• Decision of the SAA shall be final
and binding.

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMAnnexure 2
DEFINITIONS
AB PM-JAY Beneficiary refers to all beneficiaries entitled to receive benefits under AB PM-
JAY
Action Taking Authority or the ATA Any authority, which may include an individual or an
organization, that has the mandate and the responsibility under AB PM-JAY to take action on
the subject matter of the grievance filed by any aggrieved party
Appellate Authority shall mean the State Grievance redressal Committee (SGRC) or State
Appellate Authority (SAA) or National Grievance Redressal Committee (NGRC) as the case
may be that has the authority to accept, hear and adjudicate on appeals against the relevant
GRC orders

Central Grievance Redressal Management System or the CGRMS refers to system set bythe National Health Agency for registering, processing, managing, and monitoring redressing
all grievances under the AB PM-JAY
Direct Channel refers to the mode of grievance redressal where the concerned District
Grievance Nodal Officer (DGNO) or the State Grievance Nodal Officer (SGNO) redresses
the grievance by directly getting in touch with the concerned stakeholders and / or the Action
Taking authority (ATA) without having to route the matter through one of the Grievance
Redressal Committees (GRC)
Empaneled Health Care Provider refers to all public or private health care providers that

have been empaneled by any State Health Agency (SHA) in the country or by any InsuranceCompany on behalf of a SHA for providing cashless hospitalization benefits under the AB
PM-JAY
GRC Channel refers to the mode of grievance redressal where the grievance is redressed by
one of the Grievance Redressal Committees (GRC) set up under the AB PM-JAY

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMGrievance: A Grievance/complaint refers to any communication that expresses
dissatisfaction about an action or lack of action, about unfair/wrongful treatment, about the
standard of service/deficiency of service that may violate any norms, provisions or
guidelines laid down for AB PM-JAY or asks for remedial action.
Grievance Redressal means the mechanisms for receiving, registering, and addressing
grievances received from any of the aggrieved stakeholder.
Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC) refers to committees set up by the SHA or the NHA
for redressing all stakeholder grievances under the AB PM-JAY

GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMAnnexure 3
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AB PM-JAY Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana
ATA
Action Taking Authority
CGRMS
Central Grievance Redressal Management System
CMO
Chief Medical Officer
DEC
District Empanelment Committee
DGNO
District Grievance Nodal Officer
DGRC
District Grievance Redressal Committee
GOI
Government of India
GR
Grievance Redressal
GRC
Grievance Redressal Committee
ISA
Implementation Support Agency
MOHFW
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
NGNO
National Grievance Nodal Officer
NGRC
National Grievance Redressal Committee
NHA
National Health Authority
SAA
State Appellate Authority
SEC
State Empanelment Committee
SGNO

State Grievance Nodal OfficerSGRC
State Grievance Redressal Committee
SHA
State Health Agency
TPA
Third Party Administrators